---
title: "Towards Better Link Prediction in Dynamic Graphs"
authors: [andy, farimah]
tags:
  - link prediction
  - dynamic graphs
  - benchmark
  - temporal graph
  - datasets
  - neurips
---

# Towards Better Link Prediction in Dynamic Graphs

Companion blog post for Towards Better Evaluation for Dynamic Link Prediction, to appear in NeurIPS 2022 Dataset and Benchmarks Track.

<!-- truncate -->

import { CaptionedImage } from './components.js'

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2648/1*5sQmLyWtAyQI8m_jP_zejQ.png">
A dynamic graph visualization for the Canadian Parliament Voting Network. This is one of the novel benchmark datasets we contributed.
</CaptionedImage>

Many real world relations can be formulated as graphs with nodes representing entities and edges being the relations between entities. In a *dynamic graph*, nodes and edges appear and disappear, while attributes and weights change over time.

Using the above *Canadian Parliament voting network* as an example, each node represents a Member of Parliament (MP) in the Canadian Parliament and each edge represents that two MPs both voted “yes” on a bill that year. As illustrated, the dynamic graph snapshot varies significantly from 2012 to 2014 and naturally, nodes and edges can be added or deleted over time. In addition, the color of each node reflect which party the MP belongs to and the party affiliation of a given node can also change over time. For those who are interested, the above dataset is [publicly available](https://github.com/shenyangHuang/LAD) and also incorporated into our [proposed benchmark](https://github.com/fpour/dgb).

## 📚 Dynamic Link Prediction

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2928/1*dmwMNZWslwqEqEjL7RwZBA.png">
An example for dynamic link prediction. Given the graphs at <b>t=0</b> and <b>t=1</b>, would edges form between <b>(a, d)</b> and <b>(b, d)</b> at time <b>t=2</b>? beside the history of edges, one also need to consider any available node / edge attributes.
</CaptionedImage>

A fundamental task on the dynamic graph is the prediction of future interactions between nodes, called *dynamic link prediction*. More specifically, the goal is to answer this question: at time *t* in the future, what is the probability *p* of observing an edge between node *i* and node *j *?Understanding how links are formed are important in social networks, traffic forecasting, political science, recommendation systems and more.

Recently, many methods are proposed for dynamic link prediction and significant progress are made. Some example methods include JODIE [1], TGN [2] and CAWN [3]. Based on the existing evaluation setting, close to perfect performance is observed across most methods thus making it harder to differentiate between them. This leads us to closely examine the evaluation settings in dynamic link prediction and rethink how to design more stringent and robust evaluation procedures.

## 💪 Towards Better Evaluation

First, we identify several limitations in the current evaluation procedure for dynamic link prediction and proposes improvements and additions to address the issues.

* **1️⃣ Limited domain diversity:** Existing benchmark datasets are mainly *social* or *interaction* networks, thus limited in domain diversity. We introduce 6 new dynamic network datasets from *politics*, *economics*, and *transportation *and *proximity* domain. We also present novel visualization techniques to better understand the differences between dynamic networks. These visualizations show that *a significant portion of the edges reoccurs over time *and the reoccurrence pattern vary drastically across domains.

* **2️⃣ Easy negative edges for evaluation: **in the standard evaluation setting, negative edges (edges which should be predicted as non-existent) are sampled uniformly at random. Consider the sparsity of edges in real world networks, only a small number of edges are observed among all $N^2$ possible node pairs. Therefore, the edges that have never been observed previously, can be considered as *easy negatives*. In this work, we design novel negative sampling (NS) strategies to include harder negative edges including *historical* and *inductive* NS strategies.

* **3️⃣ Memorization works well: **We propose a simple memorization baseline which stores previously observed edges, and then predicts the existence of the edges based on its saved memory. We name this simple scheme *EdgeBank*, and show that while it requires neither learning nor hyper-parameter tuning, it can achieve strong performance and is a necessary baseline for future methods to compare against.

## ⏳ Understanding Dynamic Graph Datasets

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2000/1*4YlC14DS7-L1-rV1ZJ8MsA.jpeg">
Continuous-time Dynamic graphs can be modelled as a stream of edges
</CaptionedImage>


Formally, We consider a (continuous-time) dynamic graph as a **timestamped edge stream** including triplets of *source, destination, *and* timestamp*

$$
\mathcal{G} = \{(s_1, d_1, t_1), (s_2, d_2, t_2), \ldots \} \mathrm{\: and \:} (0 \leq t_1 \leq t_2 \leq \ldots \leq t_\mathrm{split} \leq T)
$$

For evaluation purposes, we split the timeline at a point $t_\mathrm{split}$ into all edges appearing before or after that. Therefore, we have train and test set edges ($E_\mathrm{train}$ & $E_\mathrm{test}$). In this regard, edges of a dynamic graph can be categorized as follows:

1. $E_\mathrm{train} \ E_\mathrm{test}$: Edges that are only seen during training.

2. $E_\mathrm{train} \cap E_\mathrm{test}$: Edges that are seen during training and reappear during test phase (can be considered *transductive* edges).

3. $E_\mathrm{test} \ E_\mathrm{train}$: Edges that are only seen during test phase(can be considered *inductive* edges).

First, to better understand the three categories of edges above, we propose novel visualization tools for understanding edge statistics in dynamic graphs.

### 👉 Temporal Edge Appearance (TEA) Plot

A TEA plot illustrates the portion of repeated edges versus newly observed edges for each timestamp in a dynamic graph.

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2648/1*2d0c7P2vELkKZXLs9aOukA.png">
The TEA plot shows that real world networks often have a large number of reoccurring edges. The numbers on parentheses reports the **novelty** index.
</CaptionedImage>

To quantitatively measure the amount of novel edges seen in a dataset, we propose the **novelty** index as follows:

$$
\begin{equation}
\mathrm{novelty} = \frac{1}{T} \sum_{t=1}^T \frac{|E_t \ E_t^\mathrm{seen}|}{|E_t|}
\end{equation}
$$

where $E_t = {(s, d, t_e) | t_e = t}$ and $E_t^\mathrm{seen} = {(s, d, t_e) | t_e < t}$. We can see that the novelty index varies significantly across datasets and domains (for more TEA plots, see our paper). Therefore, TEA plots imply the importance of the relative distribution of the repeated and new edges when designing temporal graph learning methods.

### 👉 Temporal Edge Traffic (TET) Plot

A TET plot visualizes the reocurrence pattern of edges in different dynamic networks over time. The edges are sorted based on when they first appeared. To quantify the patterns in the TET plots, we define the following metrics:

$$
\begin{align}
\mathrm{reocurrence} &= \frac{|E_\mathrm{train} \cap E_\mathrm{test}|}{|E_\mathrm{train}|} \\
\mathrm{surprise} &= \frac{|E_\mathrm{test} \ E_\mathrm{train}|}{|E_\mathrm{test}|}
\end{align}
$$

<div align="center">

![TET plots illustrate varied edge traffic patterns in different temporal graphs. The horizontal line starting with “x” marks tₛₚₗᵢₜ In parentheses, we report the proportion of training set edges reoccurring in the test set (**reocurrence** index) & the proportion of unseen test edges (**surprise** index)](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2648/1*-xSu7eFKkC_M6on3-IOUdg.png)

*TET plots illustrate varied edge traffic patterns in different temporal graphs. The horizontal line starting with “x” marks $t_\mathrm{split}$ In parentheses, we report the proportion of training set edges reoccurring in the test set (**reocurrence** index) & the proportion of unseen test edges (**surprise** index)*

</div>

The *reocurrence* index reports the proportion of training set edges reoccurring in the test set while the *surprise *index reports the proportion of unseen test edges. For example, when the *surprise* index is high, memorization based approaches would work poorly due to the large amount of unseen edges in the test set.

## 🏦 EdgeBank: a Memorization Baseline

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2648/1*w1oFgoaL7LS0mJ4V2v4NZQ.png">
Our proposed baseline <b>EdgeBank</b> simply checks if query (s, d) is in memory, if so, return True, else return False
</CaptionedImage>

In the previous section, we have seen that many edges in dynamic graphs reoccur over time. Thus, we wondered *how far can memorization take you* in dynamic link prediction? To answer this question, we propose **EdgeBank**, a pure memorization baseline which is illustrated above.

**EdgeBank** consists of a memory component (easily implemented as a hash table), which stores edges observed in the past. At inference time, EdgeBank checks if the query node pair (s, d) is in memory and return True if so, and False otherwise. We observe that while EdgeBank has no learnable parameter or does any learning at all, it achieves surprisingly strong performance in the standard evaluation setting.

## 🔍 Revisiting Negative Sampling

Motivated by the edge traffic patterns in dynamic graphs, we propose novel, more challenging negative edges for evaluation thus resulting in three categories of negative edges as shown below,

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2838/1*9qJ0Er0My-0swm6zp4v2Bw.png">
Negative edge sampling strategies during evaluation for dynamic link prediction; (a) <b>random</b> sampling (standard in existing works), (b) <b>historical</b> sampling, (c) <b>inductive</b> sampling.
</CaptionedImage>

* **1️⃣ *Random* Negative Sampling:** standard sampling procedure in current literature, randomly sample a node pair $(s, d)$.

* **2️⃣* Historical* Negative Sampling:** sample from the set of edges that have been observed during previous timestamps but are absent in the current step. The objective is to evaluate whether a given method is able to predict in which timestamps an edge would reoccur. Therefore, at time $t$, we sample from the edges $e \in (E_\mathrm{train} \cap E_\mathrm{t})$.

* **3️⃣* Inductive* Negative Sampling:** the focus here is to evaluate whether a given method can model the reocurrence pattern of edges only seen during test time. Therefore, at time $t$, we sample from the edges $e \in E_\mathrm{test}$ and $e \notin (E_\mathrm{train} \cup E_\mathrm{t})$

<CaptionedImage src="https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2664/1*tiX4EbFq9MQn-jB5qmfg6Q.png">
The ranking of methods change significantly in different NS settings. Our proposed baselines (horizontal lines) show competitive performance, in particular in the standard setup. The results illustrate the average performance over all datasets studied in our work.
</CaptionedImage>

The above Figure shows the performance of each method across the *random* sampling (standard, left), our proposed *historical *sampling (middle) and *inductive* sampling (right) evaluation. Our simple baseline **Edgebank** achieves strong performance in the standard setting. Also observe that in both *historical *and *inductive *setting, all methods have a drop in performance which emphasizes the important of negative sampling during evaluation. In addition, the ordering of methods also change.

**[📎 OpenReview](https://openreview.net/forum?id=1GVpwr2Tfdg)**: [https://openreview.net/forum?id=1GVpwr2Tfdg](https://openreview.net/forum?id=1GVpwr2Tfdg)

**📎 [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10128)**: [https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10128](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10128)

**[🔗 github repo](https://github.com/fpour/dgb)**: [https://github.com/fpour/dgb](https://github.com/fpour/dgb)

**[🔗 dataset link](https://zenodo.org/record/7008204)**: [https://zenodo.org/record/7008204](https://zenodo.org/record/7008204)

## Want to learn more?
> Find out more at Temporal Graph Learning Workshop @ NeurIPS 2022

I am also co-organizing the Temporal Graph Learning Workshop @ NeurIPS 2022. We have a great line up of speakers and are excited to see you there in person (or virtually).

1. **[website link](https://sites.google.com/view/tglworkshop2022/home)**: [https://sites.google.com/view/tglworkshop2022/home](https://sites.google.com/view/tglworkshop2022/home)

2. **[workshop twitter](https://twitter.com/tgl_workshop)**: [https://twitter.com/tgl_workshop](https://twitter.com/tgl_workshop)


References: 

[1] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and M. Bronstein. *Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs.* arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10637, 2020.

[2] S. Kumar, X. Zhang, and J. Leskovec. *Predicting dynamic embedding trajectory in temporal interaction networks.* In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019.

[3] Y. Wang, Y. Chang, Y. Liu, J. Leskovec and P. Li. *Inductive Representation Learning in Temporal Networks Via Causal Anonymous Walks. *International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
